feat: add doc for seat-based billing plans (#3414)
clerkinc/clerk-docs: docs/guides/billing/seat-based-plans.mdx

- `@clerk/tanstack-react-start` v1.4.1 or higher

Seat-based billing also requires `@clerk/clerk-js` v6.16.0 or higher and `@clerk/ui` v1.16.0 or higher. If you've pinned these dependencies, please update them before attempting to use seat-based Billing Plans.

## How per-seat pricing works

When an Organization subscribes to a Plan with per-seat pricing, each provisioned seat contributes to the Subscription cost according to the parameters configured on the Plan. Plans may also include a recurring base fee in addition to seat-based charges. Plans can also include free seat tiers. For example, a Plan may include the first five seats at no cost and charge only for additional seats.

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> - Organizations subscribed to Plans that are not seat-based will have their membership limit set to the [default membership limit](/docs/guides/organizations/configure#membership-limits). This can be overridden on a per-Organization basis.
> - If an Organization's seats are forcibly reduced (for example, when its Subscription ends), the Organization will keep its currently provisioned seats but cannot invite new members until it is under the new seat limit.

> > - When an Organization is on a seat-based Plan, you cannot manually set the Organization's seat limit.

Reviewer: This callout feels out of place to me because it talks more about seat-based limits than per-seat pricing. We could move it down under **Managing seat limits** for e.g., and even make it a paragraph rather than a callout. But open to suggestions @l-armstrong @paddycarver

Reviewer 2: The complicated thing to navigate here is there are two different types of seat limit: there's the maximum number of seats that can be purchased under a plan, period, and then there's the number of members the Organization can have without purchasing more seats.

When there was just plan limits, these two numbers were the same. With per-seat pricing, these two numbers are usually different.

These three bullets apply to the number of seats that an Organization has / the number of members the Organization can have without purchasing more seats, a concept that applies to both plan limits and to per-seat pricing.

I'm not sure I have an opinion on where to put it, but I wanted to info dump quick on some of the complexity when we talk about "seat limits".

Reviewer: What about this?

<img width="718" height="464" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-10 at 1 03 34 pm" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d8c64173-74ed-4ee2-bd07-ed8072aeb783" />

Reviewer 2: I just moved it to "managing seat limits", and I think we're on board with that -- do you like that, or is putting it at the top better?

Reviewer: Looks good to me!

---
title: Seat-based plans
description: Configure Plans that bill Organizations based on purchased seats.
---

<Include src="_partials/billing/billing-experimental" />

Per-seat pricing can now be configured directly on Clerk Billing Plans, allowing you to charge Organizations based on the number of members they have. This makes it possible to offer pricing that scales with organization size.

> For example, a Plan might include a base monthly fee plus a per-member charge. You can also configure included seats and seat limits to support more advanced pricing models.

Reviewer 3: 💭 The pricing examples should have their own H2 section, towards the end of the doc.

Inspiration: https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/platform/pricing/#compute-billing-examples

| Pricing model | Plan configuration | Example (Organization size → monthly total) |
| - | - | - |
| Base fee + per-seat | $20 base + $5 per member | 3 members → $20 + $15 = **$35**<br />10 members → $20 + $50 = **$70** |

> | Included seats | $25 base, includes 1 seat, then $10 per additional seat | 4 members → $25 + (3 × $10) = **$55** |

Reviewer 2: It could be nice to offer an example of 1 member, as well, to show that it's just the base fee.

| No base fee | $8 per member | 10 members → 10 × $8 = **$80** |

> | Per-seat with seat limit | $5 per member, 10-seat limit | 10 members → 10 × $5 = **$50**<br />12 members → blocked at checkout |

Reviewer 2: "blocked at checkout" isn't always accurate--for example, it will be blocked _before_ checkout when triggered through inviting a member. Maybe just say "must choose different plan" or simply "blocked"?

## Creating a Plan with per-seat pricing

<Steps>
  ## Open the new Plan page

  Navigate to the [**New Organization plan**](https://dashboard.clerk.com/~/billing/plans/new/org) page in the Clerk Dashboard.

  ## Configure seats

  Toggle on the **Seat-based** section, then choose how many seats the Plan allows:

  - To cap the number of seats, select **Custom limit** and enter the desired value.
  - To allow an unlimited number of seats, select **Unlimited members**.

  ## Configure the per-seat fee

  Toggle on the **Per-seat fee** section, then:

  - Enter the price per seat in the **Cost per member seat monthly** section.
  - To bundle free seats into the Plan, enter the desired value in the **Included seats** section.
</Steps>

> [!NOTE]
> The [B2B Authentication add-on](/docs/guides/organizations/overview) is required to set a custom limit greater than 20 seats or to allow unlimited members.

## SDK version requirements

To use seat-based billing, you need to be using the following Clerk SDK versions:

> - TODO

Reviewer 3: 👀

Author: Still waiting on the SDK versions. Pinged @dstaley about this earlier. Should be updating this section rather soon.

## How per-seat pricing works

When an Organization subscribes to a Plan with per-seat pricing, each provisioned seat contributes to the subscription cost according to the parameters configured on the Plan. Plans may also include a recurring base fee in addition to seat-based charges. There's also an option to include free seat tiers. For example, a Plan may include the first five seats at no cost and charge only for additional seats.

### Purchasing seats

When an Organization subscribes to a per-seat Plan, they purchase an initial seat entitlement during checkout:

- The number of seats purchased will total to the number of members in the Organization + any pending invitations to the Organization.

> - When a new member is added to the Organization does not have an unfilled seat, they will be prompted to checkout for the new seat.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a new member is added to an Organization that does not have an unfilled seat, the admin will be prompted to checkout for the new seat.
```

---
title: Seat-based plans
description: Configure Plans that bill organizations based on purchased seats.
---

<Include src="_partials/billing/billing-experimental" />

> Per-seat pricing can now be configured directly on Clerk Billing Plans, allowing organizations to pay based on the number of members using your application. This makes it possible to offer pricing that scales with organization size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Per-seat pricing can now be configured directly on Clerk Billing Plans, allowing you to charge organizations based on the number of members they have. This makes it possible to offer pricing that scales with organization size.
```

| No base fee | $8 per member | 10 members → 10 × $8 = **$80** |
| Per-seat with seat limit | $5 per member, 10-seat limit | 10 members → 10 × $5 = **$50**<br />12 members → blocked at checkout |

## Creating a Plan with per-seat pricing

<Steps>
  ## Open the new Plan page

  Navigate to the [**New Organization plan**](https://dashboard.clerk.com/~/billing/plans/new/org) page in the Clerk Dashboard.

  ## Configure seats

  Toggle on the **Seat-based** section, then choose how many seats the Plan allows:

  - To cap the number of seats, select **Custom limit** and enter the desired value.
  - To allow an unlimited number of seats, select **Unlimited members**.

  ## Configure the per-seat fee

  Toggle on the **Per-seat fee** section, then:

  - Enter the price per seat in the **Cost per member seat monthly** section.
  - To bundle free seats into the Plan, enter the desired value in the **Included seats** section.
</Steps>

> [!NOTE]
> The [B2B Authentication add-on](/docs/guides/organizations/overview) is required to set a custom limit greater than 20 seats or to allow unlimited members.

## SDK version requirements

> To use seat-based, you need to be using the following Clerk SDK versions:

Reviewer 4: seat-based billing?

- TODO

## How per-seat pricing works

> When an organization subscribes to a plan with per-seat pricing, each provisioned seat contributes to the subscription cost according to the pricing tiers configured on the plan. Plans may also include a base recurring fee in addition to seat-based charges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an organization subscribes to a Plan with per-seat pricing, each provisioned seat contributes to the subscription cost according to the parameters configured on the Plan. Plans may also include a recurring base fee in addition to seat-based charges.
```

I think we'll want to introduce the concept of pricing tiers in a later release, when we're ready to support them more fully.

> There's also an option to include free seat tiers. For example, a plan may include the first five seats at no cost and charge only for additional seats.

Reviewer 2: Not sure this needs to be its own paragraph :/ Also, Plan needs capitalized.

### Purchasing seats

> When an organization subscribes to a per-seat plan, they purchase an initial seat entitlement during checkout:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an organization subscribes to a per-seat Plan, they purchase an initial seat entitlement during checkout:
```

> - The number of seats purchased must be greater than or equal to the number of members currently in the organization.

Reviewer 2: This to me implies that the organization gets to specify the number of seats, which is technically true in the API but not in the UX, and I think we want to describe the UX here.

> - Organizations can purchase additional seats at any time while their subscription is active.

Reviewer 4: I think we can omit `active` here and use wording that emphasizes *mid-cycle* instead

It's hard to know how C1s interpret the word *active* here, since it could mean different things: active but past due, active but canceled, and so on

Author: I think you are right, especially given today's discussion!

> - Organizations can purchase additional seats throughout a billing period as their membership grows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When a new member is added to the Organization does not have an unfilled seat, they will be prompted to checkout for the new seat.
```

> - Additional seats are added to the existing subscription and are prorated based on the remaining time in the current billing period.

Reviewer 2: It's actually the opposite; we prorate for the amount of time that has passed in the current billing period. They'll get the benefit of the remaining time, not the time passed, so we charge them for the remaining time and not the time passed.

- If the Plan also has a seat limit configured, organizations cannot purchase more seats than the Plan's maximum allowed seat count.

### Organization invitations

Organizations can invite members up to their purchased seat entitlement.
Once all seats are occupied, additional invitations will be blocked until:

- Additional seats are purchased
- Existing members are removed from the organization
- Pending invitations are revoked

### Recurring billing

> At the beginning of each new billing period, the subscription's seat quantity is automatically adjusted to match the number of members currently in the organization:

Reviewer 4: should we clarify whether the charge occurs before or after right-sizing?

Author: Nice observation! Adding now!

- This means that seats that were purchased but never occupied during the previous billing period will not automatically renew.

> - Organizations can continue purchasing additional seats throughout the billing period as their membership grows.

Reviewer 2: The bulleted list feels weird to me. These feel like sentences, not bullet points.

### Using per-seat pricing with seat limits

Per-seat pricing and seat limits can be used independently or together.

> - **Per-seat pricing** determines how much an organization is charged,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Per-seat pricing** determines how much an organization is charged per seat.
```
